Future-Proof Financial Services: Leading Through Economic Shifts, AI Disruption and Geopolitical Risk.
--
Keynote By Jason Schenker.
Great, thank you very much. It's a pleasure to be here today. I'm going to be covering a number of different topics that we are really at a very serious thoughtful discussions around how to create a lens through which to think about the uncertainty that we're facing now and how to think of that in a way that can lead to competitive advantage. And I want to start by talking about the geopolitical situation because that informs the economic and the technology, and we'll talk more about some economic dynamics and why that informs the AI imperatives, and then we'll dig into some of the most important AI stuff. So first off, I want to share my thoughts on where we are right now, geopolitically, because that's informing a lot of the outlook. Today, most historians of European history, look at World I and World II as two parts of the same conflict with a 20 year armistice to resolve what's called the German question how do you resolve Germany's economic military and political propensity for Germany over Europe thinking about the Cold War when I grew up, was born in the 70s the80s. The Cold War was all about Russia. But I wonder if we maybe have the cold War broth. Early last year, I was in New Berlin, California, visiting a friend, and at the time, he was actututy lieutenant colonel professor at National Intelligence University, the shorthand of which is grand school for spies. And we had some time to kill. And he said, "Let's go over to the Nixon libraryibr." And Nixon fam." And I'm,All, let's go." Everywhere at the Nixon Library, you see this picture. Nixon shaking hands, shing lie, the Chinese premiere on the star back. And this is Nixon's Chinamo. If you look closely enough, this is by the way, this is the trip we're going to meet with John Long, and they do a deal in which they drive a wedge in Russia and China. And there's a cost of that. The cost is the one China policy. And if you look closely enough at the picture, like if you look really, really closely, you can almost see that Nixon's palming over a check to Shanai. And the check says,Pey to the People's Republic of China in the amount of ones I want0000. For the younger folks in a room, like a check is when you paid people with a piece of paper. 50 years to the month of this handshake at the Beijing Olympics. In February of 2022, 50 years to the month. Russia and China announced the Beijing Olympics that they strongly defend the outcomes of the Second World War. There is no limit to their cooperation. Ign mistake, they got married. within just a couple weeks, Russian baits Ukraine, almost 50 years the day of that handshake on the tarm. So I now wonder if, if you' 100 years from now, is to look back and they' go, well, Cold War I and Cold War II were two parts of the same conflict with a 50 year armistice to answer the China question. This is I think about Cold War 1, where did it go hot? It didn't go hot, really, in Europe, right? Yeah, there was a wall and an air blocking hairlirlift and some other stuff, but it really goes hot in Korea, Vietnam, Southeast Asia. goes hot in China's periphery. And in the same way that the Treaty Versailles says the ses for World War II, handshake on the tarmac says the seeds for C War II. And this will affect everything, not just what we're seeing in the economy, of a technology, right? I mean, we saw this, there's been almost no daylight between the first Trump administration and the second, the Bid administration and the Bid administration, and the second Trump administration when it comes to China. I'll talk about that more detail. But the biggest thing to know is, when China Russians say that the Australian depend the outcomes to the Second World War, this is what the amount looked like at that time, and the big takeaway is China bigger rush bigger. the vast majority of Americans, view China in unfavorable ways, p research 77% of Americans view China. Unfavorably. That's for. This is like the only bipartisan issue there is. And while there's a lot of political disagreements in D.C, on this topic, there is not. There's a lot of silence around this topic, because that's how hot it is. And so for many months, I've been talking about this moving to awardsartime economy, I wrote about it in my book came out earlier this year, Cold War II. Something that I've been speaking about since 2021, long enough to have trademarked it, and you know, we see Justin in the past week trying to gather its allies in Beijing. We changed our Department of Defense to the Department of War. We're moving in this direction. This is a real thing, this isn't like a theoretical and the way I want you to think about China in the U.S. is it's a milk carton relationship, right? It's going to spoil, we don't know when, but it's going to go bad, and the expiration day is probably 2027, right? 100th anniversary of the People's Liberation Army, pre Shia said that China needs to be ready in 2027 to take control of Taiwan, I happening to be at a lunch in an earlier this year, where Mike Johnson, speaker of the house was there, and I asked him, it was a small luncheon and we have 40 people. He said, Austin. I think they mean, that was I think anyone who had ever even talked to a Republican in Austin, ever. That's why it was 40 people. That was why it was that many. But, you know, I asked him in the Q&A, and I said,What is Congress doing around this? And he said that in this environment, the intelligence agencies have come in and run tabletop exercises with both houses of Congress around 2027. That means it' Democrats and Republicans in the House of the Senate have done war games around this, and that this is a real thing, and then without any equivocation or the normal political hedging says, you know, she wants control. If I want 2027. No hedging, no equivocation, no nothing in a public venue, in an unclassified public discussion. So this is coming. In August of 2023, the Bid administration had an executive order out, restricting U.S. investments in technologies with national security implications in countries of concern. Those technologies were AI, quantum, semiconductors and microprocessors, the countries of concern were China McC McCan, Hong Kong. A technological iron curtain is falling here. So it's also really important to consider. Moreover the trade topics are going to continue to reverberate. We're going to see more of that. Perceived US threats based on a recent p research poll, Mexico views the US 68% of people in Mexico view the US is the biggest threat. 59% in Canada. view the US is the biggest threat. This is kind of the issue. Transshipments is the issue here. Dual use technology, supply chains have already they've already begun to decoupled in a more rapid pace, so really important to think about your technology supply chains. you're going to see a full technological amputation. We're already kind of at that level, and if there is a kinetic conflict we're trying to over Taiwan, there will be full economic amputation. The reason that there's so much conflict with the U. US and Mexico Canada right now over trade is because it's about transits. If you saw the executive order from July 31st this year with all the different tariff schedules for different countries, that was in Section 2, Section 3, that most people missed, said that the C border Protection and USTR will be evaluating the supply chains, and if it is found that any of the trade grounds are being used for transshments, in other words, Chinese goods to be sent through somewhere else, they'll be hit with a 40% tariff. So this is all economic leverage, folks in the national security world, talked about national power as dime fill, diplomacy, information, military, economic, finance, intelligence, and law enforcement. And you can see the current administration is trying to leverage as many of those as possible, but with the biggest economy in the world, that's kind of the biggest push. We're pushing on our economic strength, using tariffs and trade as a sword and shield of economic diplomacy, so that in the hope that we can do what we did in Cold War I, which is containment and squeeze, and that's what I think a lot of this is about, isolating supply chains. The global trade restrictions have been rising. If we look back this day from the IMF 2011, 2012, about 30 restrictions for trade globally now, there's over around 300, now there's over 3,000? If we look back to look ahead during the Cold War, only about 5% of global trade went between the two blocks. Today, it's between 20, 25%, that percentage is going to go down, probably quite a bit. Let's talk about Cold War II. There's two bars that develop national security, where I see economic security, playing a role. The first is economic power, right, our GDP, our capital stock, our wealth, or labor market access to debt, right All of those things are really good. We have really strong economic power. where we're a little bit weaker, is economic self-s sufficiency, The second pillar of economic security, material, production, inventories, dual use, technology, especially technology supply chains, raw materials, and raw tonnage you need to make the weapons important. This is stuff you hope you never, ever need to use, but if you don't have it, it's better to have it not need it, than need it and not have it, which is also why you heard the President earlier this year talking about shipbuilding, which there's a big push for shipbuilding, why China has the biggest navy in the world. It's all in one spot. So let's talk about the economic power piece. So we've talked about the self sufficiency, we've talked about the other thing. Let's talk about the economic power. USGDP, the world's largest, it's been expanding, yes, there was contraction in Q1 and a rebound in Q2. A lot of that was a trade distortion. The most important thing I would point out is that there were still positive contributions from consumer spending, and the consumer was 69% of GDP in the latest report. People with jobs buying stuff. Let's talk labor market stuff for a second, and let's talk consumer. D delinquencies have risen for consumers a little bit in recent quarters. Most recent quarter, 4.41%. It's higher than it has been in the sort of post COVID period, but what you can see is it's a lot lower than say in 2009, 2010, when death delinquencies were around 12% of consumer gas. We look at mortgage credit quality. It looks like we learned the lesson of the housing crisis. You can see that 68% of all mortgage origination dollars since you1 2020 went to people at 760 plus five goes. Foreclosures in bankruptcyies are super low. So again, if 69% of GDP is people with jobs and money buying stuff, and they're pretty unlaged. This is good for the economic outlook. Look at the Atlanta Feds GDP now, the Q3 number has it at 3%. I think it'll probably turn out to be lower than that, but this is pretty good despite the jobs number on Friday. We'll talk about that in a second. CPI inflation, it's lower than it was, both CPI and PC are a lot lower than they were at the Peaks back in 2022, but they're elevated. This is going to put the fed in the dicey position as they think about cutting rates, 25 aces, points looks like a lot for September 17th, 50 basis points's going to be a tough call on Thursday, you're gonna get the CPI report out, headline like, to be 2.7 Our forecast is 2.7, with the core 3%. They could do 50 basis points. It's going to be a tough sell with elevated inflation. They will have access to more labor market data than the rest of us. If they do 50 basis points, I would be very concerned about the next few job reports. If they do 25, which seems more likely, especially if inflation remains this elevated, I think they may split the baby, and in their projections indicate that they're going to do another 50 bases point cuts before the end of the year, even if they only end up doing 25. Federal funds rate right now 425, 450 unemployment rate, 4.3 in August. It's still relatively glove, payroll number with downward revisions. You, you saw there was 22,000 jobs added in August, but 21,000 downward revisions. That means the net change for the month, for the previously published number was only 1,000 more jobs. So that's not great. You can see there's been a significant slowing, you look at the three month averages, that's been really weak. But with an unemployment rate of 4.3, this is still lower than it's been during previous crises. It's still a relatively low number, and payrolls are at a record high, and I know there was a downward revision today, which isn't going to be incorporated into this, about 911,000 more jobs were previously reported through March, then turned out to actually be created, but that won't be incorporated until the report released in February. But we're still directionally record high number of payrolls. Second highest labor force ever, 171 million, Jobless sp very low, below two million, and the really interesting part of course, there's 7.2 million open jobs. So at 7.2 million open jobs, it wants to be 2 million people looking for work. By the way, this is 200,000 more open jobs than before COVID, you still have, even if all the unemployed people, people collecting unemployment with these jobs, you'd have 5.2 million open jobs. And this really is very sector specific. Your recent college grad, unless you study nursing or accounting, you're in a tough spot right now. The jobs, you can see it, recent college grads, 4.8% unemployment. In June, that's not great. Where are the jobs are still being added on net is in places like healthcare and social assistance, where there are about 1.21.3 million open jobs in the month of July. And you can see it in the most recent numbers, where's the net games of payrolls? It's in healthcare. As you're thinking about the needs and demands of your clients, and the reason we need to talk about aon is because this is still a tight labor market in certain pockets. We look at something like manufacturing, there's 437,000 open shops. Yeah, the open jobs are a lot lower than the million open jobs in 2022, but this is still more open jobs. We haven't manufacturing than before any of the last reinancial crises. We look at construction, think about where mortgage rates are, over $300,000 open construction jobs, warehousing transportation, 364,000 These are physically demanding in person roles, all of them. AI is not going to do your transportation. AI is not going to do construction. AI's not going to do the nursing. AI is not going to do the manufacturer. Right. You have robotics and you have automation, but you don't have enough. So what's happening is companies across the economy, especially in the physical economy, the clients that you have, the tariff stuff makes their head spans, but the inability to hire the people they need for physically demanding in-person roles keeps them up at night. And so this is driving them to try to adopt AI to get productivity levers anywhere else in their businesses they can, because they're going to have to pay top dollar for physically demanding in person rolls. You see wages are already up a lot. I can't believe this. wages are up $8.10 an hour since January 2020. I remember my first job working for almost half that. It was in the 1900s, but it was the late 1900s. And that's that's a lot. And if you're manufacturing construction business, this is massive. So I've think going forward, you might see a bifurcation labor force, where more professional roles, white collar roles, you see it with the hiring, you might see it with the wages, where those wages get a little flattered because AI gives you a big productivity boost. But the physically demanding in person roles where AI can't give you leverage, those could see wages continue to rise, especially on the healthcare side. And when you see that being a really big problem for the the CPI and other measures of inflation. You look at consumer inflation, shelter, year on year rates, medical services, year on year, those things are adding to the inflation fire more than many other things. Now, if the opportunities are the risk, or there questions, for sure, right? I mean, I'll tell you a story. Earlier, this year in February, I was in a Target with my wife. I just saw one of these, like, Valentine's Day cards, one of the ones they, you, the kids who buy one group in your class, and the ones you don't like, and then you have to give them in the little, like taper. tape paper bag, your desk, that kind of thing. But anyway, they had a joke. What's a unicorn's favorite sweet? And I didn't know the answer. Like, I couldn't come up with that answer. So I put it in the Google and Google said, the AI answer pops up. Unicorn's primarily eat grass, plants, flowers, and berries, but their diet can vary, depending on their habitat, they have a low caloric need, usually around 500 to 1,000 calories a week. These are some oemic unicorns. And some unicorns may also eat apples or carrots if they can find them. My wife's reading it over my shoulder. She goes, if they can find those rare apples and carrots as opposed to the unicorns." So there are challenges, right? And a lot of this comes down to data issues. And I've talked to companies and financial services. One client I have, CEO comes to me and says, we want to use AI. We want to use AAM? We want a cross cell. Okay. Well, what's your data to look like? He, I got no idea. All right, well, I'll come in and I'll talk to your boarding. We're together, I go in. Are there a financial institution other financial institutions and I'm like, how many finients do you have 2,000 clients. How many products? Twenty Guys, this is a pivot table. This isn't AI. Like, where's your data? Oh, my God, this This is like an escape room. This is this is like, how am I. It's like playing the game a clue with my extended family. Like, who's got what somebody's got it written in paper. Somebody's got something in Share Point, somebody's, everybody's got their data in different places. And some of that's regulatory. Okay, hair pulling nightmare. But the idea that you can just AI something, you have to get your data right. When I was in grad school studying at kind of metroids 2001 and 2003. I had a professor. And computers were out slower then she would need three days of a computer, undisturbed to run a model. Today, you can run that three seconds. before she would run the model she would take two to three weeks, leaning and preparing the data. Because if you don't, which you're gonna get garbage. So today, people don't clean the data, they're like, well, I'm just gonna throw an AI and you get your three second answer. But no one cleaned prepped the data. You need a culture of data, or else you're going to have data nightmares. It's gonna be really bad. You're not gonna like it. You know, and there's all kinds of things you can do with the data. If you cleaned and prepared. And I, I'm somebody and they may all have done once and lots of data cleaning and millions of line of SAP code, you know, and you've done spend analysis and other stuff, you know, but the data has to be right. If you don't spend time in the data, you're not going to find the value. You can do the same with regional data to determine where you should be looking at things. But again, you have to check the data. I view a lot of AI, as I use it, as like, digital delegation to a junior analyst. I still have to coach it. I still have to watch what goes into it, and I have to be very careful because it doesn't know what it's doing. The other reason we're gonna need more AI is because population birth rates are falling everywhere. A pure research study, this is, you know, we look back, this is the share of adults under 50, you say that unlikely to have kids. In 2018, it was 37%, in 2021, it was 44%. Today it's 47%. So you're going to see declining birth rate. There's a book written about this over 15 years ago, what to expect when no one's expecting, but birth rates everywhere have fallen. You're going to lead a lot more technology going forward. And then we have other things that present risk in the labor market. Like we already have 37 of debt. And by the way that I mentioned, we're moving more wartime footing economy, and then we haven't even talked about entitlements. So, I'm going to ask you a quick question. Anybody know the Social Security website, if you go there, do you know who their grandfather of Social Security is listed on the Social Security website? Anybody? I guesses. Roosevelt. Rosoosevelt, FDR? No guess it'son Bismar. This picture comes directly with this and everything. This is from the Social Security website. I'll give everybody the deck afterwards. I'm not making this up. In 1880s, Germany, there was a conflict, a rising socialist Party, and Otto, the Blood and Iron Chancellor, not the Bunny Rabbits and Rainbow Chancellor, had the idea that maybe we could short circuit the Socialist Party by giving them something worthless, which is Social Security benefits. You would get them in an average age of you would get them at age 70. Anybody know the life expectancy in Germany, 1880s? 40, 40, Ford. So in 30 years spread between you get the benefits and when you have done. So here's the catch. Payroll taxes are going to go up a lot going forward. We have entitlements that are funded that way. That's going to provide an incentive to automate labor and add more productivity gains as well. We're going to see a lot more of them. And then I would say, you know, as you're thinking about AI and automation, I would encourage you to consider that this time is never different. I remember in the '80s, my father and grandfather ran on a county firm, and when Lotus 123 came out, you may remember this, right? There were a lot of folks in a accounting that said, I'm never going to use a computer for spreadsheets. I'm never going to use a spreadsheet that's digital. And those folks were either very quickly out of business or they very quickly got really good at Lotus 123, which of course, the 400 big cell. So, a couple of things for technology, I would encourage you to think about the value in making sure the data is good. There's lots of analytical value. There's lots of operational efficiency values, lots of productivity value. But there's also the antiotechnology side. I think about the importance of relationships, real connections, making time for people, and being present, like you all are here today, and with that, I thank you very much. 
And I'd love to turn it over for questions if there's time. Thank you.
