The New Wave of Tech-Driven Finance – Insights from Industry Visionaries
--
Times already, which is fascinating to see what's happening in how much progress was done around this area. So if you can share with us, maybe a little bit on what is the overall strategy what's happening in the market, but also some of the use cases is that you saw in financial services are all ag and what is the future of it, right? So it's kind of like three parts of question.. Thank Monica, if you just look at the journey and say, thank you for talking about the unicorns and real artific, I don't know the hallucration part, but let me start with an sort of the part on. It's a very fascinating paper if you want to go, just go search, and do models hallucinate. It's not too different than people, actually. It's from open AI and a couple of other people are Giorgia Tech and really a fascinating paper. It actually says, the gist of it as really one sentence or two sentences,L aside all the math and chory details behind it, it's about if you reward models to answer, they will answer. You are rewarding me to answer it's like, you know, for those who have kids in 50% still, would you would actually, you know, if the kid is an elementary school and the teacher says answer, will answer. You are not paralyzed to answering wrong. You just answer. So the models, if they are rewarded for answering, the answer. And when they're not right, we call it hallucination. It's not too different than people, by the way. Interestingly, the p to that is rewarding rewarding models to answer honesty. So it's that, not too different than people, so I don't in general from a technology point of view, I don't like this point on hanging on to something for example, hallucinations and sort of beating down technology on it because the understanding of technology is evolving amazingly fast. And the point of intelligence is not just knowing, but to me, intelligence is about knowing what you don't know. And that entire period is called reasoning about uncertainty. And when that field will collide with generative AI, you're gonna see another step function as well, and that is just a b. If you just go and look at the literature, most of the literature has shifted from generative AI to reasoning about uncertainty. That's probably one of the hottest topic right now in the entire field. How to make these models understand their own certainty and then leave that into your generation of content and answer. So not just reward them for answering, but reward them for answering honestly. Very akin to people so that hopefully, I'm hoping that Unicorn answer will change, that there is no such thing, that exists. Having said, I wanted to start with that because there is exactly a technical reason and answer behind it. And we too often be down on technology. Now I'm going to go to the main programming, actually.
and I got wrong of course it'll get it wrong. Adding two numbers is not a generative way I problem. Can somebody tell ChatGPT to please use a calculator that humans have used for millennials, one form or the other and if you do, you pose the problem there are two numbers added get the response into your answer you would be right not only would be right as financial institutions I enterprises, you are more likely to trust. because you have trusted that mills So if somebody can guarantee me that they are getting the answers from the tools in the processes that we have used for a long time, I' more likely to trust AI because I trust the underlying principles and the truths behind it. So we are getting to a point where generative AI is not just chatting for you, but it actually can start integrating tools that you use in enterprises. Financial instruments, risk calculations, compliance, reports, and so on, into the work that you are trying to do, actually. And there are three steps to it, I would say, actually in the journey of there are three steps to it. The first one is an agent calling tools, typically, most people I would say in their journey of agent AI today will be at the first two levels. Let me describe the second one as well, but the first level is is an agent and an agent can call kind of five tools, like no more. The more you give it, the more it can get confused as well. because too many options, not unlike people, by the way. You give too many options to people, they get confused. Like, I don't know if you've ever been to a mattress store and try to figure out what mattress. There are too many options, like, just give me three. I can figure out from those, actually. It's almost like that. They can get confused, actually.. The second level is, you basically have an agent calling other agents, but in a managerrial context. So there's a manager agent and that can call other agents. But other agents cannot call each other. So Again, very similar to how we humans have sort of turned towards organizing work. So, managers tend to distribute the work, the work means to get done, they're report, and the work means to get integrated. The third level is, which is taught in actually books, of AI as well, for many decades now on what I'll describe as multiated systems, which is truly distributed. Any agent can call any agent willy nilly. They all decide among each other who should call? That is Nirana. Most people are at the stages, I would say, many of them at the first one. And if you are not, I strongly urge you to get on that. What we might call it, Bandwagon,rection, vector, whatever you might call it, because if you are not, I think I sincerely believe where we are going is literally reimagining the future of. At least knowledge work. And I do believe it will collide collide with mechanics as well, actually and robotics. You just not there yet. Mechanics is very hard. human body is a perfect. It's even hard for us to imagine how our muscos skeleton and our brain was together. And that's a very hard one to achieve. I think one of the hardest ones will be where physical word and the knowledge work can combines. But I think just coming back to your other points, Monica on where we see from a financial point of the things that have really taken hold. Since I've been working on this for almost five years now, actually before Chat GPT even arrived. I think most enterprises are it'll be fair to say software enterprises and one form done. The word is digital around us and software is everywhere and sort of I would say the killer app or AI has turned out to be software engineering. So one place where you have seen a lot of is, you know, AI and the software coming together, whether that is four generation,istant, legacy, applications, legacy, application, understanding, transformation, Cobal, everything else. That's really. the skills are not as prevalent. Then you can I think as well, help me understand makes sense of this legacy and bring it into a model. That's, I think, a classic use case that we are seeing it across business applications, across processes, across IT transformation and so on. And I think we'll be fair to say, we at IBM have been working on that from a consulting point of view, from a technology point of view, mean that area. The other one obviously are in the area, obviously, transformations of your business processes, whether that happens to be a, whether that happens to be customer support, whether that happens to be released sales and so on. That's another one where we have seen a lot of traction from AI and in particular, at least the beginning
of the rollout of the agentsociations, as well as both Oakland and Monica, you know it very well. 
Thank you. Glenish. Who is our managing partner for IBM Cul Financial Services and I don't think she needs another introduction here. So good afternoon, everybody. I have a few questions here and I'm really going to try not to be off script, but it's going to be hard. I'm gonna start with Glenn. Look, we've been talking to a lot of twice in all our clients, they are talking about they're dreaming about theI and what they're not doing about AI. So then, what you have been been seeing in terms of the difference between the reality, the data points, right? The So what have you been seeing at our appliance in terms of AI transformation?, microphone. I' take care of my phone. So we did a study. Our IVV does a study, CO study, awesome study. It distills from my perspective, 30 pages, 60, 50, and 3, 60, 50, and 3, 60% said, let the CO said they're busy. They're doing AI, GII, agendic, they rockin it. 50% said they're pushing their organizations faster than they want to go. And then there was a page. It was page 8. I actually brought page 8. I don't have a unicorn page, and I feel bad about that. But page 8 says the top three things at CO's F on, number one, forecast accuracy. Forecast accuracy. Or view. Cybersecurity and data privacy, and then productivity or profitability. Now, Monica, to your question, I thought it would be good to talk about the study said, right? We don't see a lot of CEOs asking generative AI to improve or casting. Our cybersecurity business in financial services is double this year, so I'm on side there. But the whole productivity and profitability thing, that's the one where I'm struggling with a little bit, because, you know, late 2024, early 2025, were the years of POCs, and everyone was frozen in time, staring at the shiny objects. And honestly, I would say that most of our CEOs or clients are still a little bit frozen in time they're tipping their toes in the water in technology pro tipping, meaning, okay, we're going to do git lab, we're gonna do this, it's going to do that, but people who are really risking the farm, we don't see it. So what we did is we said, okay, we're going to take the IBM balance sheet and we're going to go you're on your direct cost self funding. We're going to put 80% of our fees at risk. So if it doesn't work, you don't paint. I almost got fired for that, right? But we don't know how to unlock that paralysis in any other way than for us to take the risk, because it's not a technical issue anymore. The early models and hallucinations and Richo talked about this, that we spent a lot of sleepless nights trying to deal with hallucinations, but that stuff is mostly gone now, right? It's about risk, and that's the piece that besides us taking the risk, we didn't know how to unlock that next frontier of how to drive productivity and profitability. So that's what I saw in the study, and that's what we see with clients. I answer that'c from the conversations with the clients rights, most successful stories that we're seeing is when clients do really focus on a business problems. And we had a discussion with our clients today that was fascinating because if you explained the problem that they solved to the outside world, people probably would not understand, but was a very huge problem for that internally. That was like being in terms of the employee experienced a climate, to experience, I mean, the amount of money that they were investing. And when they were able to apply the solution and solve that specific problem, which was a very well known and famous one, I would say, things change it, right? So I think that's the more focused that they have when a very, 
very t sometimes any specific problem, but more successful they're going to be.
